---
title: using Markdown as Next.js pages
coverImage: /img/md2next.png
date: '2021-01-27'
author: jmm
thread: 'behind-scenes'
locale: 'en-US'
---

In [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/pages), each page in your
website is represented by a javascript file that serves as its
entry point. These pages get pre-rendered at build time, or on the server side
if they're dynamic, which has the advantage of being easier to index by spiders
and also to be immediately ready to display on the client as no startup code
needs to run before things appear.

This is great but, of course, I don't want to write my posts in javascript!
I write posts in [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/basics)
as it is a great compromise between being readable and providing rich encoding.

What I ended up doing was to write a [webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) plugin
that lets me use my markdown content in place of the usual javascript files. The
plugin simply takes a `.md` file as input and generates javascript that next.js
can then compile like it expects to. In the end, it simply is a matter of
modifying  `next.config.js` to handle the conversion:

```js script
config.module.rules.push({
  test: /\.md$/,
  include: pagesFolder,
  use: [
    ...loaders,
    {loader:path.resolve('lib/post-loader.js'), options:{}}
  ]
})
```

 - `pagesFolder` is the path to the `/pages` folder that next.js uses to build
 the tree structure as markdown present elsewhere should be left alone
 - `loaders` is the set of plugins already registered to process javascript, I
 should be able to make this implicit but haven't figured it out yet (any advice
   would be welcome)


The code in `lib/post-loader.js` then, given the Markdown content, inserts it
into code like this :

```js script
import PostPage from '~/components/post'
import {getPostThread} from '~/lib/compile-posts'
<<<importSupportScript(md)>>>

const content = <<<escapedSource>>>
const slug = <<<slug>>>

const Page = props => (
  <PostPage
    md={content}
    slug={slug}
    script={MDScript}
    <<<coverSize(md)>>>{...props}
  />)

<<<makeGetStaticProps(md)>>>

export default Page
```

 - `escapedSource` is the markdown content with back quotes escaped so it's safe
 to include in source code
  - `slug` is the name of the markdown file
  - `coverSize(md)` fetches the size of the cover image if there is one in the
  front matter of the post
  - `importSupportScript(md)` lets me import more code (as `MDScript`) for pages that include
  special features, but I'll talk more about this in a future post.


And then there is the interesting case of `makeGetStaticProps(md)`... It currently
generates code that next.js will use when it builds the site, this code will
fetch information about other posts in the same thread, like Vercel samples
do. Writing this post,
I realize that I could just fetch the information on the spot and generate
variables like for `content` and `slug`. Which I'm going to do right away
because it will have a marvelous consequence: getting rid of `getStaticProps`
will make my pages fully static which is the most efficient. That's
fantastic, this blogging works as a code review !

To see this in context, you can check out the code on [gitHub](https://github.com/jmuffat/jmuffat.com) !

In future posts I'll talk about implementing i18n (Internationalization) which
I have almost finished and, as promised above, I'll talk about how [posts with special features](/posts/20210119-mapdev)
are put together.
